## Codeacademy Learn Go Notes

- The `go run` command combines both the compliation and execution of code for us. THis allows us to quickly check the output of our code (and for any errors)
- `go build` creates an executable file in our current folder. `go run` does not.

#### Packages

- Every Go program starts with a package declaration.
- The package declaration informs the compiler whether to create an executable or a library.
- In contrast to an executable, a library doesn't outright run/execute code - it is a collection of code that can be used in other programs.
- Programs that have the package declaration `package main` will create an executable file.
- The `import` keyword allows us to bring in and use code from other packages.
- The package name is enclosed with double quotes "", otherwise we will get an error.
- Packages serve an important role in Go. They group related code together, allow code to be resuable, and make it easier to maintain. 
- We only import packages we need. Our programs run faster because it's not bogged down by extra code/packages.

#### Basic Go Structure: main

- The `func` keyword denotes the start of a function declaration.
- `func` is followed by the name of the function.
- After the name is a pair of parentheses () and a set of curly braces {}
- In other programming languages, functions have to be called, i/e/ told to run its code. However, a `main` function is special, a file that has a `package main` declaration will automatically run the `main` function!

#### Importing Multiple Packages

- A list of Go's standard packages: https://golang.org/pkg/
- You can provide an alias to a package by including the alias name before the file in your import statement.

#### Comments

- line comments are: `//`
- Block comments are `/*` `*/`

#### Go Resources

- Go has it's own built-in documentation system. To use it, in the command line, use the command `go doc` followed by a package name. For example `go doc fmt`. Or get specific infomration about a function in a package, for example `go doc time.Now`
- Codeacademy Forums: https://discuss.codecademy.com/
- Stack Overflow's Go Questions: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/go
- Go's offical site: https://golang.org/
- Google it

#### Review Quiz

- When would building an executable file using `go build` be preferable to `go run`?
  - If the code is being used in production (users are interacting with it) then using an executable file is preferred. => Correct, rather than using `go run` multiple times, using `go build` once and executing the binary file is better for performance.
- What is the purpose of a library in Go?
  - A library is a Go package that won't create an executable file but contains code that we can use for our program. A library is a package that contains code that is not executed. It does not have the `package main` declaration.
- What is the importance of the package declaration: `package main`?
  - A package with the `package main` declaration will compile into an executable file.
- Fill in the code to import both the `fmt` and `math` packagew and alias `fmt` as `f`

```go
import (
	f "fmt"
	"math"
)
```

- What is the purpose of Go's compiler?
  - To translate Go code into binary code that computers understand.

#### Values and Variables

#### Literals

- Values can be numbers, like `109` or text wrapped in quotes, like`"Hello world"`. Thesevalues can be written into code as is, and are called literals. They are literally what they say they are.

#### Constants

- In addition to literal (aka unnamed) values, there are also named values. Naming a value in Go means creating a word that will represent that value. One example of named values are constants, which cannot be updated while the program is running.
- Another example of named values are variables which we can update their value.
- We use the `const` keyword to create a constant. We immediatley assign a value to the constant using a literal. Throughout the res of the program, we can use the constat's name instead of the literal.

#### Data Types

- Go has three basic categories for numbers:
  - Integers
  - Floating-point numbers
  - Complex numbers

#### Assigning Variables

- Variables are placeholder names that we use to refer to values that we intend to update over the course of our program.

#### Inferring Type

- There is a way to declare a variable without explicitly stating its type using the short declaration `:= `operator. We might use the `:=` operator if we know what value we want our value to store when creating it.
- Floats created with `:=` are of type `float64`
- Integers created with `:=` are either `int32` or `int64`

#### Different Verbs

- The verb `%v` is a placeholder and fills in with the value of the second argument

```go
guess := "C"
fmt.Printf("Is %v your final answer?", guess)
// Prints: Is C your final answer?
```

- The verb `%T` prints out the type of the second argument.

```go
specialNum := 42
fmt.Printf("This value's type is %T.", specialNum)
// Prints: This value's type is int.

quote := "To do or not to do"
fmt.Printf("This value's type is %T.", quote)
// Prints: This value's type is string
```

- `%d` will interpolate a number into a string

```go
votingAge := 18
fmt.Printf("You must be %d years old to vote.", votingAge)
```

- `%f` will interpolate a float into a string. We can limit how precise we are by including a value between the `%` and `f` like this: `%.2f`

```go
gpa := 3.8
fmt.Printf("You're averaging: %.2f.", gpa)
// Prints: You're averaging 3.80
```

#### Sprint and Sprintln

- `fmt.Sprint()` doesn't print out anything. Rather, it returns a vluae that we store in a variable

```go
grade := "100"
compliment := "Great job!"
teacherSyas := fmt.Sprint("You scored a ", grade, " on the test! ", compliment)

fmt.Print(teacherSays)
// Prints: You scored a 100 on the text! Great job!
```

- Returning a value and printing it are two different things. In our code above, we've formatted one string by concatenating four separate strings. To see the value of `teacherSays`, we have to use a print statement.
- `fmt.Sprintln()` works like `fmt.Sprint()` but it automatically includes spaces between the arguments for us (just like `fmt.Println()` vs. `fmt.Print()`)
- The `Sprintf` method works similarly to `fmt.Printf()` the major difference is taht `fmt.Sprintf` returns its value instead of printing it out.

#### Getting User INput

- `fmt.Scan()` allows you to get user input

```go
fmt.Println("How are you doing?")

var response string
fmt.Scan(&response)

fmt.Printf("I'm %v.", response)
```

- `fmt.Scan(&response)` takes the first value before a space and stores it in `response`. 
- The `&` is an 'address'. `fmt.Scan()` expects addresses for arguments.

#### The if Statement

```go
alarmRinging := true
if alarmRinging {
  fmt.Println("Turn off the alarm!!")
}
```

#### The `switch` Statement

- The `switch` statement uses alternative syntax that is easier to read and write than long `if` statements.

```go
clothingChoice := "sweater"
 
switch clothingChoice {
case "shirt":
  fmt.Println("We have shirts in S and M only.")
case "polos":
  fmt.Println("We have polos in M, L, and XL.")
case "sweater":
  fmt.Println("We have sweaters in S, M, L, and XL.")
case "jackets":
  fmt.Println("We have jackets in all sizes.")
default:
  fmt.Println("Sorry, we don't carry that")
}
// Prints: We have sweaters in S, M, L, and XL.
```

- The `switch` keyword initates the statement and is followed by a value. In the example above, the value after `switch` is compared to the value after each `case`, until there is a match.
- Inside the `switch` block, `{...}`, there are multiple `case`s. The `case` keyword checks if the expression matches the specified value that come safter it. The value following the first `case` is `"shirt"`. Since the value of `clothingChoice` is not the same as `"shirt"`, that `case`'s code does not run.
- If none of the `case`s are true, then the code in the `default` statement will run.

#### Scoped Short Declaration Statement

- We can include a short variable declaration before we provide a condition in either `if` or `switch` statements. Here's the syntax:

```go
x := 8
y := 9
if product := x * y; product > 60 {
  fmt.Println(product, "  is greater than 60")
}
```

- In our `if` statement, we first declare `product`. Notice that `product` is separated from the condition using a semi-colon `;`. We can also have a short variable declaration inside a `switch` statement:

```go
switch season := "summer" ; season {
  case "summer"
  fmt.Println("Go out and enjoy the sun!")
}
```

- One thing to keep in mind when using the short variable declaration in `if` or `sqitch` statements is that the declared variable is scoped to the statement blocks. In programming, scope refers to where variables can be accessed. Having the variable scoped to the `if... else if... else` statement or `switch` statement means that variable is only accessible within the blocks of those statements and not anywhwere else.

- This code will throw the error `./main.go:11:13: undefined: product`

  ```go
  x := 8
  y := 9
  if product := x * y; product > 60 {
    fmt.Println(product, " is greater than 60")
  }
  fmt.Println(product)
  ```

- Even though we define `product` in our code snippet, we can only access `product` inside of the `if` block. Therefore, when we try to access it outside of the block, the compiler thorws an error. We say that `product` is out-of-scope outside the `if` statement.

#### Randomizing

- Go has a `math/rand` library that helps us generate a random integer:

```go
import (
"math/rand"
"fmt"
)

func main() {
  fmt.Println(rand.Intn(100))
}
```

- In our `main` function, we're printing out a random number using `rand` and the `Int()` method. The argument, `100`, is the maximum value that the method will return. Looking at the entire line `fmt.Println(rand.Intn(100))`, it should print a random integer from `0` to `100`. However, if we run our program multiple times, we'll find that it always prints `81`

#### Seeding

- Previously, we saw how our random numbers weren't entirely random. The reason for this behavior is due to how Go seeds (or chooses) a number as the starting point for generating random numbers. By default, the seed value is `1`. We can provde a new seed value using the method `rand.Seed()` and pasing in an integer.
- However, we encounter the same problem if we pass in a constant, i.e. pass in `5`. Each time we run our program, we'll always print the same set of numbers. Therefore, each time we run our porgram, we also need a unique number as a seed. One way to get this unique number each time we run our program is to use time. The reason why we can use time to be our unique number is because it's always a different time when our program is run.

```go
package main

import (
"fmt"
"math/rand"
"time"
)

func main() {
  rand.Seed(time.Now().UnixNano())
  fmt.Println(rand.Intn(100))
}
```

- In the example above, we import the `time` library. We then use the `time` library and call `.Now()` with the `.UnizNano()` method chained to it. This results in the difference in time (in nanoseconds) since January 1st, 1970 UTC. (Check out the UnixNano documentation for more details: https://golang.org/pkg/time/#Time.UnixNano) The number we get from time.Now().UnixNano() is passed as an argument to `rand.Seed()` resulting in a different seed value each time we run our program. Since each run has a unique seed value, each run will also print out a random number from `0` to `100`

#### What is a Function?

- We can use a function to define some logic to perfomr a task and call it (execute its code) when we need it.

```go
func doubleNum(num int) int {
  return num * 2
}
```

- Quick reminder, one of the major differences between the `main()` function and other functions is that the `main()` function doesn't have to be called, because the compiler already knows to run it.

#### Scope

- A function definition creates something called a scope.
- Scope is a concept that refers to where the values and functions are defined and where they can be accessed.
- When a variable is defined within a function, that variable is only accessible within that funciton. When we try to access that same variabel from a different function, we get an error because we can't do it. Each function has its own specific scope.
- The below code exits with the error `./main.go:12:26: undefined: x`

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func performAddition() {
  x := 5
  y := 7
  fmt.Println("the sum of", x, "and", y, "is", x + y)
}

func main() {
  performAddition()
  fmt.Println("What if", x, "was different?")
}
```

- The error is raised because the `x` in `main()`'s print statement `fmt.Println("What if", x, "was different?")` is in a different scope than the defined `x` inside `performAddition()`'s `x` variale in the scope of `main()`
- There are three different scopes present in this example:
  - The global scope, which contains the function definitions for `main()` and `performAddition()`
  - `performAddition()` has a local scope, which defines `x` and `y`
  - `main()` has a local scope also. It can access `performAddition()` because that's defined on the same scope level as `main()` but can't access the internals of `performAddition`s scope (i.e. `x` or `y`)]

- The differentiation of scope keeps the namespace, (the available variables and keywords) cleaner as a result. You can only refer to variables or functions defined within a specific namespace.

#### Returning Values from Functions

- While variables and their values are scoped to their functions, we do have built-in ways of passing information out of their native functions and into another namespace. Let's describe the way that information can be sent from within a function to the call site, the place where the function is called. This is done by returning a value - when we return a value, we pass the value to another palce in our code. A function can be given a return type, the type of a value that will be returned by the function. At the call site, the return value can be stored within a variable of the same type as the function's return

```go
func getLengthOfCentralPark() int32 {
  var lengthInBlocks int32
  lengthInBlocks = 51
  return lengthInBlocks
}
```

- Above, we wrote the function `getLength)fCentralPark()`, we can also decide the return type by adding a type after the set of parentheses. In this case, our function has a return type of `int32`. Then, inside the function, we declare a variable `lengthInBlocks` with a value of `51`. In our last line, we have our `return` statement. A return statement tells the function to pass back a value (or multiple values) and stops the function from executing any more code, i.e. if we put more code after our return statement, it would not run! 

#### Using Function Parameters

- We know that functions can return information, but we can also provide functions with information using parameters. 
- Function parameters are variables that are used within the function to use in some sort of computation or calculation. When calling a function, we give arguments, which are the values that we want those parameter variables to take. We give our function parameters types when defining the function.

```go
func multiplier(x int32, y int32) int32 {
  return x * y
}
```

- In the funtion above, we added information inside our parentheses, that is where paramters belong. Our first parameter is `x` and it has a type of `int32`. Our second parameter, `y` also has a type of `int32`. After the parentheses is something we've seen before: the type of our return value. Since both parameters have the same type, we could write it as:

```go
func multiplier(x, y int32) int32 {
  return x * y
}
```

- It's important that we provide the same amount of arguments that our function is expecting. If the function definition has two parameters, then calling it will require two arguments. If you don't, the Go compiler will throw an error that reads `not enough arguments in call to (functionName)

#### Reusing Code with Functions

- Functions are great for code reuse, this means that when you find yourself repeating the same pattern over and over, it might be a good idea to try and abstract it into a function.
- When you abstract your pattern into a function, this means we take the logic it takes to solve our problem and generalize it into a function to solve multiple problems.

#### Multiple Return Values

